So much for General Dean. Your personal opinion of
General Dean seems to be very high. Absolutely. He
wrote a book, of course, just a couple of years
after he came back to America, discussing his job
in Moscow, and he was, in the book, very negative
about the Russians. He wrote the title, The
Strange Alliance. Yeah. So... He seemed to become
more negative right after the end of the war. I am
convinced that, well I won't say I'm convinced,
but I think General Dean feels the same way I do
about the Russians. I'm probably putting that the
wrong way in respect to his rank, but I was a full
colonel there and he was a very independent
general. I might say I feel the same way about the
Russians that I think he does. That's probably the
best way to put it. I don't think the hardcore
communists will ever, ever change.
Maybe in 40, 50 years, maybe a couple of
generations, the communist ideologies can
change. Now, a terrible war could have its
consequences. Maybe new regimes, this is almost
unthinkable. Let's say a new regime is not
communist in Russia, maybe 50 years, yeah. But in
my lifetime, in your lifetime, I just don't see any
really change whatsoever in the communist
ideology and the powers-to-be that will always
assume power in Russia. And I think we are always
going to have the same problems in dealing with
them.
I... And these are the feelings that you got after
being in Moscow? My years of experience, yeah. And
reflecting a lot, too. I, when I immediately
returned from Russia, And I went to the Air War
College for a course in 1950. I
spoke very highly of the Russians. As a matter of
fact, some of my classmates called me, teased me as
being red or pink Charlie. On the other hand, I
spoke of the inevitability of a war with Russia. I
just knew it. Inevitable, we'd be in a war with
Russia. After a few years, several years, five,
six, I began to change that opinion, and
completely change where, no, it's not
inevitable. As a matter of fact, we might even be
able to get along with it. But now I've reverted
back to my original. Inevitably, there's got to be
a war. And it's funny to say it, but it's got to be a
war in order to have world peace. Somewhere or
other, there's got to be a war. Communism has got to
be controlled some way or other, and I just don't
see how it's possible to ever control it or stop it
or eliminate it without conflict. May not be us
major, maybe the Chinese. And you begin to see this
crack. Even the Communists don't believe a lie.
Oh, that's absolutely. Now, there's a couple of
other people in Moscow that you had relations
with, and I'd like your impressions of those. One
was George Kennan. George Kennan, from the
standpoint of dating with the Russians, I never
really talked to him as much as I'd say Ambassador
Herman or maybe some of my colonel cohorts in the
military, in the mission.
I think Kennan showed his impatience with the
Russians more than, certainly There was sort of an
aura about the, or an atmosphere about the embassy
and the military mission. We were in the building
right across the street from the Kremlin. The
embassy was called Esposo. You've probably seen
it. I think the Attaché's, or whatever you call it
now, the office, I think it had been moved from the
old place where it used to be, right next to the
International Hotel across the street from
Kremlin. I think it's a new building in Russia,
Moscow. I don't know where it is, since I was there.
But there was an aura about, to deal with the
Russians is difficult. After six months... And
what did Cannon say about this? Oh, I'm sure he felt
the same way. I don't remember him making a
positive statement. But when you'd fly the
Ambassador around, Kennan would usually go,
wouldn't he? Oh no, no. He wouldn't? No, no, very
seldom. Gee, he'd stay there. Yes, Kennan would
stay back and be the chief then. He'd take care of
the home store while the Ambassador was gone. And I
don't remember spending a lot of time talking to
him. How did he impress you? I don't remember
thinking very much of him. of what type of person he
was. He was just a very capable man, did his job
well, and Ambassador Herman seemed satisfied
with him. I never even dreamed of him at one of these
days being an ambassador level. I don't know.
Well, I just never thought about it. But I'm not
surprised. Look at me. I was first lieutenant
colonel, then major general. The colonel, by the
way, I mean the Navy captain was over there for a
while, eventually became chief of naval
operations, Admiral
It would be Sharktown. I can't remember his name
now, but he became the chief naval officer.
There's no doubt, to answer one of your questions,
service of that nature definitely will enhance
the career of a career military man. There's no
doubt about it. Oh, sure. What about Charles
Boland? Chip Boland. Well, I knew him, Chip. He
was, to me, one of the... one of the finest State
Department men I think I've ever met, including
Ambassador Herman. Why do you say that? He
impressed me. First place, he could speak the
language very well, speak almost perfect
Russian. He impressed you as an able man. He spoke
well. His personal appearance was impressive. He
looked to me like a diplomat.
He felt, I think, the same way about the Russians
that I'm telling you I feel about the Russians.
I think at times I remember, if I recall correctly,
I figured one of these days, I felt like Chip
Boland, but like I did Kirk LeMay. One of these
days, this man will be an ambassador. And I figured
him out that way. And to go back to Ken, see, I don't
remember this impression of Ken. I don't mean to
show any disrespect for him, but he just didn't. I
didn't think of him as ever going to be an
ambassador one of these days. Chip Boland,
definitely. Why? Because he just was more
brilliant? Or he was just more outgoing? What
about his personality? Ken's personality was not
near what Boland's was. He was a harder man to know
to me. Chip Boland was very easy to talk to. Ken, no.
Ken represented to me more of the, if you will, the
starched, reserved diplomat. Sort of British, a
la British style, if you will. I don't know what
that means anything. That's the way I look at it.
Whereas Chip Boland is the typical old easygoing
American.
And
I grew to be very close with Chip Bowen. We were very
close friends.
We talked about General Dean. There was no other
real key officer over there that I can. By the way,
we had a doctor with a mission. And we never really
had any medical problems over there. Let's talk
about life in the embassy, then. How about your
quarters? Tell me about your quarters. I and about
six other officers lived in the ex-German
military attaché's home quarters within walking
distance of the embassy and also the Kremlin.
Klebny Paliolik Street, meaning bread. Klebny.
Charny Kleb, which is black bread in Russian. And
then I learned conversational Russian. I studied
it religiously every day. I had an interpreter
come in. She'd teach me Russian grammar. It's not
difficult. I'm very interested in it. Did you get
very proficient? No. I really didn't have a chance
to. I looked for chances to practice it. And I'd
always talk to my driver and my maids, always doing
that. But never really on a dedicated sense. So
you, and tell me about your quarters. They were
very adequate, typical European type quarters,
small beds. We had, I think eight of us lived there,
and we had 11 servants, including the gardener. So
we were adequately covered. And Lily, I don't even
remember her last name, but it was always Lily to
me, Latvian, was the, I'd say in her 60s, was the
head of the house. She ran the household and bossed
all the servants and me being the ranking officer
of all the Army, Air Force, Navy guys living in the
and she and I would always talk. As a result, we grew
very close and she could speak good English. And as
a result, I learned to know a little bit about the
Russian man of the street by talking with her. And
I'll get to a key discussion a little bit later on.
But the house was warm. Winter was severe. The heat
was adequate. I had a fireplace in my particular
room. I had sort of, I guess, the best room in the
whole building. It was just a huge home, typical
wood construction, plaster on the outside. What
about the food? The food was basically
American-type food.
dishes now and then. Always the main, one of the
best parts of the meal would be the soup. Many
different kinds of soup, including the old beet
borscht, which I just loved. We had adequate meat.
Mostly American, shipped in from the United
States? Oh yes, oh definitely. We ate a lot of
cabbage. As a matter of fact, there's a lot of
variations I've learned ways to eat cabbage. One
of the best was a cabbage roll with sort of a
hamburger meat inside. They were terrific cooks,
very dedicated people. I learned to love all of
them. They were about four or five maids and one or
two gardeners. I didn't get to know them very well.
They were men. And then I think it was one or two
house maintenance people. Were they all elderly?
Yeah, all of them. All of them. Well, one of the
maids, I
think her name was Massimova, I believe. She was
the youngest one. I'd say she was in her late 20s. I
don't know much about her. She spoke broken
English. Very courteous. And she was usually the
one waiting on us at the table. We had normal
breakfast, normal lunch, and normal dinner.
We
lived comfortably, ate well, and had our liquor
supplies, although sometimes we ran out of
everything. We never ran out of vodka. We could
always get vodka locally, either potato vodka or
wheat vodka. How about the telephones? Do you
think that the phones or do you think that the rooms
were bugged? I always expected any place I was,
including the vehicle I was traveling in, to be
bugged. As a matter of fact, we were briefed this
way. All of us had to be very careful. So you never
had political conversations while you were in
your room with others or at the dinner table or
anything like that? Oh, we'd drop our guard at
times and get to talking. I'm sure many times we
said things we shouldn't be talking about and I'm
sure were picked up. As a matter of fact, when I was
over there, and you may recall this, is the time
that they subsequently found a vibrating
transmitter type like you find in the receiver of a
telephone that was behind the President's seal or
the Ambassador's seal in the main dining, in the
main ballroom of the Esposo house that across the
street a Russian transmitter microwave was
spotted on. That thing was in there at that time. We
didn't know it. Ingenious, ingenious methods of
eavesdropping. We had our security service man
that I talked to you about, I took him over to the
safe and all, and we had his little, he had his own
little very secure room in the building there by
the, across the street from the Kremlin. And of
course we had our own debugging equipment. Did you
ever find any bugs in your quarters? I don't recall
finding any. Could you sort of give me your typical
routine for the average day when you weren't
flying, but I mean, taking the Ambassador
someplace? Routine day would be get up and have
breakfast. About what time? Oh, anywhere from 6 to
7, something like that, for the work day. Yeah,
that's what we're talking about. And be up. Many
times I would walk to work just for the exercise,
but in the inclement weather or if I had real urgent
business, I would have a chauffeur. The chauffeur
would be waiting outside. At the entrance, at the
gate entrance, were always stood two NKVD guards,
Russian Army Guards. They had them posted
outside. They stayed there 24 hours a day. They
even had their little cubby boxes to get back into,
you know, every now and then. But I'd get to work
around, somewhere around, between 8 and 9.
Rather, a lot of, most of the time sort of boring
duties and looking for things to do.
The Russian newspapers were Russian and the only
thing really I could get out of them was looking at
the pictures. Of course, nothing compared to our
newspapers, no such thing as an advertisement.
I'm talking about Pravda, TASS, that was one or two
others. I would, although it was not my duty, and I
had to be very discreet about this and was told and
briefed to be very discreet about it, I was not an
intelligence man. I was there to help the
Russians, and therefore I'd compromise my
capability if they ever started suspecting me as a
typical attache that obviously had intelligence
gathering as one of my functions. There's no doubt
they considered me that way. No doubt. Any and all
of us included as intelligent general people.
They looked up on us. The Russians are suspicious
people. They're suspicious people. I'm talking
about the hardcore people now. No, what did you
usually do in the morning? Did you brief the
ambassador? I keep getting off the subject. No,
no. No, I never bothered the ambassador except
only when he called. Every once in a while we'd
have- Did General Dean brief you? Sort of keep you
up on top of the situation? If I had a particular
project, like I was preparing a trip to the
Ambassador, I would keep General Dean briefed
about the prospects of weather and maybe, you
know, General Dean ought to keep the airplane at
Cairo for a day or two longer to get an engine
change, something like that. Or if I... knew some
visitor, some VIP-type visitor was coming over,
like the weatherman, to have some talks with his
counterparts for collaboration and liaison and
cooperation. Then we'd have to make plans. And I'd
say, well, I've got the choker all lined up. And
we'd call over through the interpreter. We always
had to use an interpreter to make the appointment.
And a meeting is set up at 9 o'clock. And sometimes,
General Dean would go on some of these meetings. I
would escort him. I'd go with him. A specific
example, General Dean and I visited the chief of,
one of the, he wasn't the chief of staff, but he was
one of the top men of the Russian Red Air Force, to
give him, actually present to him, an Air Force
bomb site. And we'd never done this before, but we
knew that he had them. Because somewhere he'd been
shot down and recovered. So we knew they had the
bomb site. We weren't given anything they didn't
have. But we presented the general. I can't
remember his name, by the way. He was Colonel
General. Colonel General was the one with the
three star.
Very fine and very impressive man. He's one of the
few generals that I remember with, and I remember
this right today. He's one of the very few Russian
generals that, and General Dean agrees with this.
We walked back from the meeting from the Kremlin,
we were talking about it. He talked freely to us
after we gave him the bombsight and, you know,
passing the social dimensions of the day. We got
upon the subject of cooperation between
Americans and the Russians, and he talked very
freely about he wished, you know, that we're very
much alike, and there's no reason for us to, you
know, together there's no reason we'll easily
defeat Hitler, you know, and Mussolini, and he
wished things could be better where it would be
easier for him and us to have meetings. The routine
you'd have to go through with arranging a meeting
is just, it would take maybe two or three days. And
these were people we were supposed to be talking to
daily, you know, for liaison and cooperation and
winning the war effort. But the routine you'd have
to go through with, well, for instance, it took us a
month to get permission to go through the...
surrounding defenses of Moscow to go out and have a
picnic on the banks of the Volga River. It took a
month to get permission for different kinds of
people to do this. Again, security. But getting
off the subject, getting back on your routine,
that would be a typical part of my job. I would see
some pictures of Russian, new Russian airplanes.
diplomatic mail pouch which was free from
inspection. I'd send those back home and I'd do my
best from a standpoint of intelligence. I'd
actually sit down and write sort of memos for the
record of my impressions or maybe discussions
with a particular general or when I'd meet some of
the lower ranking operational Red Air Force pilot
types at the front. Like when we visited the front
at Lavoe, Poland, where the Russians were taking
that
city back, and I actually got to talk to some of the
fighter pilots. You know, I'd come back and make a
memo for the record of my impressions of them. Very
impressive guys. Okay, so let's then switch from
your routine and let's talk about your field
visits. How many did you have during those
thirteen months? We made a visit to
Leningrad. Basically you'd work like an eight to
five day, five days a week. Oh yeah, okay. So you
made a visit up to Leningrad. Wait, you made a visit
to Leningrad and that was just before New Year's of
43 and 44. and actually that was while it was under
artillery siege from the Germans, but was never
taken. No. And they had actual air raid, if you
will, air raid alert procedures against
artillery barrages, and at the time we were there
we heard none of them, but we were taken to a
building at one time, and two binoculars could
observe German observation posts. It was that
close to the city. I took another trip with General
Joe Cannon. What did you think of Leningrad? Tell
me about that. Very impressive city. Yeah, but
what did they do? Why did they take you up on this
trip to begin with? Why did they take you out of
Moscow? Supply. It was a supply mission to the
field. See, we had a right. Let's say we were
sending them supplies, so we felt we had a right to
go out to the ports where these supplies would
arrive and sort of touch base with the local people
that were doing this work. And this was primarily,
I think, a Navy mission. At one time, we wanted to go
on up to Murmansk, but never got that chance to do
that. It was too difficult to arrange. But the
Visits Leningrad, we talked to some of the Navy
officials. I do remember taking a motor trip
through the port area and seeing their naval
facilities, but never even got out of the car. We
were oriented mostly to the arts and cultures of
Leningrad, which were just fantastic,
beautiful. So they took us more or less on a tourist
trip, primarily. And of course, briefed us on the
threat. Sure, how'd it look? It must have looked
terrible after they were under siege for about
three years. That's right. Well, actually, the
best way I can describe any place we saw in Russia
was bleak. Bleak, bleak, bleak. And everything
blacked out at night. No lights. How'd the people
look, Dave? During this time they were eating
horses. Oh, yes, it's obvious. Well, matter of
fact, I saw,
at night I looked out the hotel window and saw
people dragging corpse on a sled, you know, it was
winter time, frozen street, dragging corpse on a
sled, probably taking to the cemetery. Oh, they
were, the rationing was very severe. Leningrad
was under siege, like you say. And I guess that's
one reason they wanted, they were glad to take us to
Leningrad. They could show us the difficulties
and the horrors which Russia was confined with to,
you know, to prod us on, to give us more supplies,
more supplies. They need more supplies. And, of
course, we poured, just poured the supplies into
Russia. The food, armor, you name it. No telling
how much we did. Then I took another trip to the
front, Leveaux, Poland, like I told you when I was
taking this strictly tactical, very tactical
trip, very interesting. Saw the Red Army
operating in the field with the Red, primarily the
Red Air Force. A couple of forward, advanced
forward bases where the fighters, mostly P-63,
P-39, the ones we gave, P-39 aircraft. They were
operating in quite a lot of those, and they loved
the airplanes. They loved the cannon in it. We had
a, I think it was a 20 or 30 millimeter gun, one gun
right out of the nose of the P-39. They loved that.
And they kept saying they loved the
maneuverability of it. And I never could
understand that because I hated the airplane. But
what they meant was they loved the rate of climb. It
so happened that old airplane had the best rate of
climb of any airplane we had in the inventory at
that time. And they liked the airplane. And one
more of them. I think we must have given Russia
about 14,000 of those airplanes. Tell me about the
conditions on the front, and how many went? How
many of you people went up there? Well, of course,
we escorted General Cannon, a visiting general
from the Italian front, a tactical air commander
in Italy. He promised him a trip to the front, and
this is what we were doing. I went with him. Did
General Dean go? No, General Dean didn't go on.
General Dean went on a Leningrad trip with me. But I
think that's the only trip I went with General
Dean. Of course, we visited shuttle bases several
times down in Ukraine, but on the trip with about
three or four of us, Army General, whatever the
condition was, very primitive. It was obvious
they had gone out of their way to even calcify an old
farm building. with, you know, paint the walls
white with council lines. Sure. And had some army
bumps with new blankets. Incidentally, they were
United States blankets. And being suspicious of
them, I think they arranged that purposely, so
that, you know, they were using that equipment. It
was comfortable, but very primitive. Bedbugs,
number one, every place. Realized bedbugs? Hell,
yeah. And flies, oh, I remember eating the soup.
Actually, you'd have to take your spoon and push
the flies away from a part of the soup in the bowl and
then get a quick soup, a spoonful, to take it
without any flies. And you didn't want to
embarrass them. And then actually making a
comment to you, seeing what you were doing, oh,
don't worry about it, they're not bad. Were they
eating them? Oh, yeah. Well, I don't know whether
they were eating flies. I know I didn't eat them.
They seem adept at getting them out of the way more
so than I am. I guess they were used to it. The
Russian commanders in the field were very
impressive. As a matter of fact, I distinctly
remember on that particular trip, the Red Air
Force tactical commander was not in the air. He
rode in the advanced tank of the army. He was with
the army commander. That's where he rode in that
tank, not the air. And he commanded from that tank?
That's right. He called in airstrikes right from
the advanced tanks? That's right. He was right
with the Army commander at all times. Correlating
the Air Force and the Army. What was your opinion of
that? I was impressed. As a matter of fact,
you see over there at that time, and I think perhaps
still so, the red tactical the tactical air forces
are under the army they're part of the army see at
that time we really were too we were the united
states army air corps yeah i know uh but uh i still
think our uh air support philosophy is superior to
theirs well let's not get into that i want to talk
about this this visit now yeah and so what about
tell me about some of some of the other conditions
well uh Let me finish. So you were sleeping in
bedbugs, and you were eating off trees with flies.
The food was adequate, and vodka. They just poured
the vodka to us continually. And in a lot of cases,
thank goodness, because it was sort of a dreary
atmosphere. We didn't get to see, we didn't hear
guns shooting. We didn't get to that point, but we
were. You weren't that close. No, not at the Army
front. But we were at the air front, where the
advanced support bases were. This was strictly
for air support, because General Cannon was an air
support tactical air commander. That's what they
wanted to show him. We just saw a lot of P-39s on the
periphery of the field with bent propellers. And
their supply, like I said, we gave them so many and
they were advancing in such mass movements that
they'd bum up an airplane and just push it over the
side and see they had more in reserve. We were just
pouring airplanes into them. Everything they did
in those big pushes, everything mass, mass, mass.
M-A-S-S, that was their philosophy. and I saw rear
echelons of supply and support for the Army going
down the muddy roads past the air base. I can't
recall seeing a paved road in Russia outside of any
city. I have yet to see a paved road outside of any
city, and I flew around over the area of Russia on an
airplane. And it was, you saw a lot of mud. Oh, and it
was, it was the It's sort of like you see in the
movies. Bedraggled column that looked like it was
intermingled with refugees, but this was all
military supply. What about the- Wagons going by
horses. Yeah. Typical old country wagons stacked
with you name it. I'm sure some was ammunition. I'm
sure some was food, clothing, medical. a medical
wagon that reminded me of something I've seen in
pictures of Civil War Red Cross. Drawn to horses.
And it mixed with artillery drawn to horses. But
they were moving it up. And like they always said,
you know, they could see doubts in my eyes, I guess,
but gee, this is the best you got. It works. It
works. It killed Germans. That's how they'd
respond? Always. It killed Germans. And the key
general, I think he was equivalent to a lieutenant
general, the army commander at the front. I
remember us talking to him and mentioning, you
know, our relations at Moscow. I wish we could talk
more than anything. And I remember him saying
this, and I don't even recall, of course we had
Russians traveling with us, obviously members of
the political gang up there, and he made the
comment that, through the interpreter to I and
General Cannon, oh, the further you get from
Moscow, the easier it is to talk. We have no
problem. The further you get from Moscow, the
easier it is to get things done. It reminded me of a
very typical saying in America, you know, You
can't get anything done at the Pentagon, so I abhor
the duty. And I'm sure this was, in other words,
here was a typical serviceman talking to another
typical serviceman, and obviously you have the
same problems no matter what country you're in.
The further you get away from headquarters, the
easier it is. I was shown a Sturmovik airplane.
This was their attack airplane, which we were
very, very interested in in the United States at
that time. and which incidentally we never did
copy until just recently, and we now have the A-10,
the tank buster, which the Air Force has got, which
to me is really essentially that same type of
attack airplane, the Sturmwaffe. It was
armor-plated all across the front. It was an
inline engine and had bomb bays in the wings, and it
was essentially a tank buster, if you will.
necessarily had an armor plate on the front. It was
primarily a ground support type airplane, a slow
airplane, easy prey for a fighter to knock down,
and always operating at low altitude. Usually
they escorted it with P-39s or some other type
fighter, a Yak type fighter. And the pilot all this
through an interpreter course all the time and of
course this is where I really got interested in
things. I was asked questions from out of the zoo
and they opened a little hatch on the top of the wing
and showed me the little bomb bay and in this bomb
bay which was about a foot wide and maybe three feet
long running between the ribs of the wing was I
guess about Must have been eight or ten. Looked to
me like a French 75-millimeter round with three
little fins, metal fins, welded on the end of it.
Now, this was a bomb, and it wasn't in Iraq. They
just laid in there, and they were all rusty, all
covered with rust. Now, this was the bomb load of
that airplane. It had two on each side. I mean, it
had a total of about maybe 30 or 40 of these. What was
your opinion of that? Well, you can imagine. As a
matter of fact, I'm sure if I recall, I did try to
restrain my appearance on my face in questioning,
what in the world? And again, you know, it killed
Russians. And I think I do remember, I think I did,
well I asked, this looks like 75, and I think he did
say, yes, it's 75. We made bombs out of them.
Incidentally, while in Leningrad, I did go to a
munitions factory where I saw them making bombs.
But not these things. These were rusty. And he told
me that he'd make the dive on a target, whatever he
was tacking on, and then he'd pull a lever in the
cockpit, and it opened the door on the bottom, and
they just landed on the door. When they opened the
door, they just fell out. And they would explode on
impact. And that's all they were. But he said they
killed Russians. I mean, killed Germans. I'll
never forget that. Not very effective. Well,
they swore by the storm of And the German, we've
learned from the Germans that it was a very
effective airplane, but they lost a lot of the
German fighters.
On the other hand, the Russians along that front
had shot down many German aircraft. The elite of
the German fighters were oriented against our 8th
and 15th Air Forces, you know, the attacks on
Germany proper. top pilots, the best of the German
Air Force, was not on the Russian front. And all air
battles were never above 15,000 feet, something
like that. A lot of, there was a lot of air support
for the German Army, Stuka type aircraft, which
was easy targets for the Russian fighters to shoot
down. I think at that time, I believe, I remember
his name, Poprishkin. He was the top ace of the Red
Air Force. I think he had 54 to his credit at that
time. Fifty-four. That's fantastic. Did you meet
him? No, I didn't. I never did meet him in person.
But the conditions on that front were primitive.
How about the soldiers and the airmen that you saw,
the pilots that you saw? How did they look? The... I
didn't see any actual maintenance facility. This
was probably an advanced staging base. Actually
an advanced forward attack base, really, and
there were no maintenance facilities on the base.
It was just open field. Like you'd find an open
meadowland with a fence wire around it in, let's
say, western Texas, with a few bum airplanes
parked around the periphery. aircraft had
recovered this field and landed in the direction.
I saw no evidence at this time of even supply
trucks, you know, that would rebomb and bomb them
up. It may have been very well just a recovery base
where they'd land and then maybe refuel and go back
to the rear supply base, but I don't remember even
seeing any refueling trucks. Did you see any
aircraft? Did planes come in? I saw planes flying
in the air, but there was never an airplane landed
or recovered at that particular base where I was at
the time. How about at other bases on that front? I
didn't visit any of the other bases. Why'd they
take you here instead? That's a good question. It
seems kind of strange that they'd take you here
instead. Any particular trip, and I remember you
talking to me about your trip over there, and I
think I asked you sort of a leading question. He
said you could take pictures and they told you to
take pictures of anything you see. But did they say
that you could go any place you wanted to go? That
was my question. You couldn't get there. And
obviously you weren't going to go any place you
wanted to go. All of these trips were laid out in
advance. It took General Cannon, he had to stay
over another week. His trip was laid on for about
three days and he ended up staying about ten days in
Moscow. It took that long for them to finally lay on
an airplane and take him to the front. And I'm sure
the reason they did it is that he finally got
permission from the ambassador to tell Molotov
that he was tired of waiting. He had a war to fight on
his own, and he was leaving. He wanted to go back.
Just forget everything. The next morning, they
called and said his trip's late on. That's one of
the things I'll never forget. Here is an American
who said, look, I'm not messing around any longer.
Forget it. I'm going home. Then they let him go. And
I think part of this, however, was preparations
for his trip. They had to make preparations. For
instance, I told you in order. Sure, and so then
they took the general out to an airstrip where you
don't even see any airplanes land, didn't they?
Well, they had airplanes for us to inspect. They
showed us, they had a story for us to show us. They
had a P-39 to show us. And that was the first? It's
strictly, yeah, you say it's a trip to the front.
But, you know, oh by the way, they showed us a little
U-2. It was similar to a training airplane that I
soloed in. It was a little tiny bug plane. But you
never saw any action, did you? We were briefed.
Briefed, you know, with maps and all, showing
where the troops are and all. I don't remember
actually hearing any artillery bombs. And they
say they won't, they They didn't want to protect
us. They didn't want to expose us to any danger.
They were always careful to say this. But you
didn't even see any operations done. And so you
flew out there for how long? You stayed overnight?
Yes, I stayed overnight. And then you flew right
back? And I was glad to leave. And then I was right
back. General Cairns was disgusted. I bet you he
was disgusted. His remarks was, how in the world
can an outfit like this win a war? You know,
comments of that nature. Of course, I'd gotten,
I'd been over there about six months at this time,
and I'd seen so much of it that, you know, I didn't
get upset like he did. So I just looked at him and
grinned. But now, when we was forced to, and then I
think, well, of course, we made a lot of other trips
to the front. Well, tell me about some of those. But
before I get to those, these are routine. We had,
you know, it's our own course of recovery. But on
the way to one of the trips to Cairo, I had lost
number three engines. I lost the, I was losing
number three engine because of oil pressure, so I
had to cut it off. So we had to land. And we happened
to be approaching Vladivostok on the way down to
Tehran. I had the ambassador on board, Geraldine.
Vladivostok? Vladivostok is, I'm sorry, I'm
sorry. You'd be gone. Stalingrad. Stalingrad.
You'd be gone. Yeah. About 5,000 miles out of your
way. I wish that I could have taken a trip like that
one time. Stalingrad. Okay, you're going down to
Stalingrad on a Volga. We always flew right over
Stalingrad, you know. It was checkpoint on the
Tehran bus route. Well, you were there right
during, no, a little bit after. This is after. This
is after it turned out, and I had to land. I always
had to carry a Russian radio operator and
navigator aboard my airplane on every flight.
This is what they required. I couldn't fly any
place. Well, what did you think about that? I
didn't object to it. I told him Brampton didn't
need him. But he said, well, did he bother you? And I
said, no. He said, well, there's no saying
anything about it. Words of that nature. And they
never did bother me,
except one time I ordered a navigator out of my
cockpit, but that's another story. But we had to
land. Was he fooling around? No. We had a problem of
being lost in a snowstorm. He didn't know where we
were, and he was scared to death, and I woke my
navigator up there. But that was a return flight
from the Tehran conference. But in this
particular case, we had the land. And I, through
the interpreter, I told the Russian navigator to
contact the base at Stalingrad and get permission
to land there. So he did, and we were cleared. So we
came into Stalingrad. Now, this was seeing
emergency landing, if you will. So I knew no
preparation could be made for this. And I learned
later on that, oh man, this caused consternation
from Stalingrad up through the channel and clear
back to Moscow. The ambassador of the United
States going into Stalingrad had just been
cleared out, you know. It was still really an alert
combat base. It's just rubble. Oh, goodness,
yeah. And I came in and landed. And of course, he
made me leave. The crew started working on the
airplane. In the meantime, the scrambled
arrangements that the Russians had to make to meet
the ambassador and take him someplace in the city,
and the crew and all, the ambassador, and Kathy, I
think. Yeah, the girl was with us. Her daughter was
with us on that trip. And I'm sure we caused the
greatest upset in that nation for that week, just
for that landing. Somehow they had an old beat up
automobile, I don't know why, it was a Russian type
vehicle of some sort. It looked like maybe some old
pickup that some farmer had in Texas. Just what
they brought out to pick up the ambassador in.
That's all they had. Yeah, that's all they had. But
again, it worked. It ran. That's the Russian, it
worked. And they, of course, they took him and
said, I don't even know where he stayed, but... We
ended up after they took me around. You stayed with
the plane? No. See, we had to stay overnight. And it
was only in the afternoon. So you landed in the
afternoon, and they came out with his pickup, and
they took the ambassador. Took him away first, and
then General Dean stayed with me and the crew for a
while. And then we took Kathy with him, I think.
First objective, of course, to take him away.